docs: Pipeline semantics (#383)
ConduitIO/conduit: docs/pipeline_semantics.md

  filtered the message out) or by a destination. If a pipeline contains multiple destinations the message needs to be
  acknowledged by all destinations before it is marked as acked. Acks are propagated back to the source connector and
  can be used to advance the position in the source system if applicable.
- **Nacked** - a message was negatively acknowledged either by a processor (e.g. a transform failed) or by a
  destination. If a pipeline contains multiple destinations the message needs to be negatively acknowledged by at least
  one destination before it is marked as nacked. When a message is nacked the message is passed to
  the [DLQ](#Dead-letter-queue).

**Important**: if a message gets nacked and the DLQ handler successfully processes the nack (e.g. stores the message in
the dead letter queue), the source connector will receive an ack as if the message was successfully processed, even
though Conduit marks it internally as nacked. In other words, the source connector will receive an ack every time
Conduit handled a message end-to-end and it can be safely discarded from the source.

> Pipeline nodes will either leave the message open and send it to the next node for processing or ack/nack it and not

Author: Nothing, that message is "done", the processor will just drop it and fetch the next message. The destination won't see a message that was acked by a processor since the processor node won't send it to the next node.

send it further down the pipeline. If the ack/nack fails, the node will stop running and return an error that will
consequently stop the whole pipeline. The returned error is stored in the pipeline for further inspection by the user.

### Message state change handlers

A pipeline node can register state change handlers on a message that will be called when the message state changes. This
is used for example to register handlers that reroute nacked messages to a dead letter queue or to update metrics when a
message reaches the end of the pipeline.

## Semantics

### Messages are delivered in order

> Since messages are passed between nodes in channels and a node only processes one message at a time it is guaranteed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since messages are passed between nodes in channels and a node only processes one message at a time, it is guaranteed
```

> that messages will flow through the Conduit pipeline in the same order as they are received by the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that messages will flow through the Conduit pipeline in the same order that they were received at the source.
```

Author: I went with "...same order that was produced by the source."

There are two caveats:

- If a pipeline contains multiple source connectors then the order of two messages coming from different connectors is
  nondeterministic. Messages coming from the same source connector are still guaranteed to retain their order.

> - If a dead letter queue is configured then negatively acknowledged messages will be removed from the stream while the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a dead letter queue is configured then negatively acknowledged, messages will be removed from the stream while the
```

Author: That comma would change the meaning of the sentence, I reworded it to make it clearer. I changed "then" into a comma instead.

Reviewer: the change made it much clearer

>   pipeline will be kept running, thus impacting the order of messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pipeline is still running, thus impacting the order of messages.
```

Author: I went with "pipeline will keep running"

> The order guarantee only holds inside of Conduit. Once a message reaches a destination connector it is allowed to buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order guarantee only holds inside of Conduit. Once a message reaches a destination connector, it is allowed to buffer
```

messages and batch write them to 3rd party systems. Normally the connector would retain the order, although we can't
vouch for badly written connectors that don't follow this behavior.

### Messages are delivered at least once

Between pipeline restarts, it is guaranteed that any message that is processed successfully by all nodes and not
filtered out will be delivered to a destination connector at least once. Multiple deliveries can occur in pipelines with

> multiple destinations that stopped because of a negatively acknowledged record, or pipelines, where a destination

Reviewer: this time it's an extra comma :D 
```suggestion
multiple destinations that stopped because of a negatively acknowledged record, or pipelines where a destination
```

negatively acknowledged a record and processed more messages after that. For this reason, we strongly recommend
implementing the write operation of a destination connector in an idempotent way (if possible).

The delivery guarantee can be changed to "at most once" by adding a [dead letter queue](#Dead-letter-queue) handler that
drops unsuccessfully processed messages.

### Acks are delivered in order

Conduit ensures that acknowledgments are sent to the source connector in the exact same order as records produced by the
connector. This guarantee still holds, even if a destination connector acknowledges records in a different order or if a

> later record gets filtered out faster than an earlier record managed to get written to all destinations.

Reviewer: I don't get this sentence.. could you elaborate more, please?

Author: In _Message states_ we explain the "Acked" status:

> Acked - a message was successfully processed and acknowledged. This can be done either by a processor (e.g. **it filtered the message out**) or by a destination.
> /.../
> Pipeline nodes will either leave the message open and send it to the next node for processing or **ack/nack it and not send it further down the pipeline**.

To sum up, "filtering a message" means acking it and not sending it to the next node.

Imagine a source connector that first produced message A and then message B. Message A would flow all the way to the destination, while message B would be filtered out by a processor. Since nodes are processing messages in parallel, message B could get filtered out (i.e. acked) faster than message A would reach the destination. Conduit still makes sure that acks will reach the source in the correct order - it waits for message A to be acked before sending the ack for message B back to the source, even though internally the acks might have happened in the opposite order.

The other scenario is that of a badly written destination connector that writes records asynchronously and messes up the order of acks sent back to Conduit - in that case Conduit would again make sure to correctly order the acks sent back to the source connector.

---

I'll see if I can reword it to make it clearer.

Author: @maha-hajja let me know if the rewording makes it clearer.

Reviewer: Ah I had the whole meaning of "filtered out" misunderstood.. I thought filtered meant filtering some fields from the records and was wondering why would we ack it after that.
But now I get it! thank you

Reviewer: @lovromazgon yep rewording is perfect

that all downstream nodes received the message). As a consequence, the speed of the pipeline will be throttled to
accommodate the abilities of the slowest destination connector.

### Dead letter queue

Messages that get negatively acknowledged can be rerouted to another destination called a dead letter queue (DLQ) where
they are stored and can be reprocessed at a later point in time after manual intervention. If rerouting is set up and
the message successfully reaches the DLQ the message will be acked instead. The user has the option to configure a DLQ
that simply logs a warning and drops messages to achieve "at most once" delivery guarantees.

### Pipeline stop

A pipeline can be stopped in two ways - either it's stopped gracefully or forcefully.

- A graceful stop is initiated either by Conduit shutting down or by the user requesting the pipeline to stop. Only the
  source connector nodes will receive the signal to stop running. The source nodes will stop running and close their
  outgoing channels, notifying the downstream nodes that there will be no more messages. This behavior propagates down

>   the pipeline until the last node stops running, draining any open messages in the process.

Reviewer: draining here means writing them to all destinations?

Author: Essentially yes. I'll reword it to make this clear.

Author: @maha-hajja let me know if the rewording makes it clearer.

- A forceful stop is initiated when a node stops running because it experienced an unrecoverable error. In that case,
  the context that is shared by all nodes will get canceled, signaling to all nodes simultaneously that they should stop
  running as soon as possible. Messages that are in the pipeline won't be drained, instead, they are dropped and will be
  requested from the source again once the pipeline is restarted. The error returned from the first node that failed

>   will be stored in the pipeline and can be retrieved through the API.

Reviewer: should we specify which API?

Author: I didn't go into detail here on purpose, it would be out of scope for this document. To be honest, I was reluctant even mentioning the API here, but didn't find a better way of saying that the error is stored and retrievable.

Reviewer: agree

  [kafka connector](https://github.com/conduitio/conduit-connector-kafka)). Every destination connector is managed by a
  destination node that receives records and sends them to the connector. A pipeline requires at least one destination
  connector to be runnable.

There are additional internal nodes that Conduit adds to each pipeline not shown in the diagram, as they are
inconsequential for the purpose of this document (e.g. nodes for gathering metrics, nodes for managing acknowledgments,
etc.).

## Message

A message is a wrapper around a record that manages the record's lifecycle as it flows through the pipeline. Messages
are created in source nodes when they receive records from the source connector, and they are passed down the pipeline
between nodes until they are acked or nacked. Nodes are only allowed to hold a reference to a single message at a time,
meaning that they need to pass the message to the next node before taking another message¹. This also means there is no
explicit buffer in Conduit, a pipeline can only hold only as many messages as there are nodes in the pipeline (see
[backpressure](#Backpressure) for more information).

> ¹This might change in the future if we decide to add support for multi-message transforms.

Author: It's all speculation at this point and it depends on if/how we want to implement this. But yes, essentially this would mean a node could hold multiple references to messages and do with them more powerful transformations (e.g. combine into a single record, batch). Calling this an "explicit buffer" is a bit of a stretch IMO, since the buffering would be more of a side-effect than the purpose of such functionality. Technicalities aside, it would definitely create a buffer, that much is certain.

### Message states

A message can be in one of 3 states:

- **Open** - all messages start in the open state. This means the message is currently in processing, either by a node
  or a destination connector. A pipeline won't stop until all messages transition from the open state into one of the
  other two states.
- **Acked** - a message was successfully processed and acknowledged. This can be done either by a processor (e.g. it
  filtered the message out) or by a destination. If a pipeline contains multiple destinations, the message needs to be
  acknowledged by all destinations before it is marked as acked. Acks are propagated back to the source connector and
  can be used to advance the position in the source system if applicable.
- **Nacked** - a message was negatively acknowledged either by a processor (e.g. a transform failed) or by a

>   destination. If a pipeline contains multiple destinations, the message needs to be negatively acknowledged by at least

Author: > NACK (received with errors or was otherwise unreadable, etc)

I assume you're talking about the NACK signal in the context of network protocols? While the term is borrowed from that space, it does not necessarily mean the same thing in Conduit. Here a nack means that the processing of a message failed and resulted in an error.

I'll try to clarify this part!

- If a dead letter queue is configured, negatively acknowledged messages will be removed from the stream while the
  pipeline will keep running, thus impacting the order of messages.

The order guarantee only holds inside of Conduit. Once a message reaches a destination connector, it is allowed to buffer
messages and batch write them to 3rd party systems. Normally the connector would retain the order, although we can't
vouch for badly written connectors that don't follow this behavior.

### Messages are delivered at least once

Between pipeline restarts, it is guaranteed that any message that is processed successfully by all nodes and not
filtered out will be delivered to a destination connector at least once. Multiple deliveries can occur in pipelines with
multiple destinations that stopped because of a negatively acknowledged record, or pipelines where a destination
negatively acknowledged a record and processed more messages after that. For this reason, we strongly recommend
implementing the write operation of a destination connector in an idempotent way (if possible).

> The delivery guarantee can be changed to "at most once" by adding a [dead letter queue](#Dead-letter-queue) handler that

Author: By default, the DLQ handler would just return an error, causing the node that nacked the message to stop running.

On the other hand, you could configure a handler that sends the message to another destination (that's the DLQ), or a handler that just ignores nacked messages and does not cause the node to stop.

For more info about this see the PR description, bullet point "Failed messages stop the pipeline". Note that we still need to implement this behavior, right now we only have the default.

connector. This guarantee still holds, even if a badly implemented destination connector acknowledges records in a
different order, or if a processor filters out a record (i.e. acks the message) while a message that came before it is
still being processed.

### Acks are delivered at most once

Acknowledgments are sent back to the source connector at most once. This means that if a message gets negatively
acknowledged and is not successfully processed by a DLQ handler, the acknowledgment for that message won't be delivered
to the source connector. Acknowledgments of all messages produced after this message also won't be delivered to the
source connector, otherwise the order delivery guarantee would be violated. The absence of an acknowledgment after the
source connector teardown is initiated can be interpreted as a negative acknowledgment.

### Backpressure

The usage of unbuffered channels between nodes and the absence of explicit buffers results in backpressure. This means
that the speed of the destination connector dictates the speed of the whole pipeline.

There is an implicit buffer that needs to be filled up before backpressure takes effect. The buffer is equal to the

> number of nodes in a pipeline - similar to how a longer garden hose holds more water, a longer Conduit pipeline can hold

Author: I almost didn't include this, thinking it felt a bit out of place 😅  Good to know it makes sense!

accommodate the abilities of the slowest destination connector.

### Dead letter queue

Messages that get negatively acknowledged can be rerouted to another destination called a dead letter queue (DLQ) where
they are stored and can be reprocessed at a later point in time after manual intervention. If rerouting is set up and
the message successfully reaches the DLQ the message will be acked instead. The user has the option to configure a DLQ
that simply logs a warning and drops messages to achieve "at most once" delivery guarantees.

### Pipeline stop

A pipeline can be stopped in two ways - either it's stopped gracefully or forcefully.

- A graceful stop is initiated either by Conduit shutting down or by the user requesting the pipeline to stop. Only the
  source connector nodes will receive the signal to stop running. The source nodes will stop running and close their
  outgoing channels, notifying the downstream nodes that there will be no more messages. This behavior propagates down
  the pipeline until the last node stops running. Any messages that were being processed while the pipeline received a
  stop signal will be processed normally and written to all destinations.

> - A forceful stop is initiated when a node stops running because it experienced an unrecoverable error. In that case,

Author: I'll add an example. Two scenarios come to mind when I hear unrecoverable error - either there is no DLQ set up and a nacked message causes the node to stop running, or we experience an issue with a connector (e.g. it has a bug causing it to panic or produce an error, or it can't communicate with the 3rd party system for some reason).

the dead letter queue), the source connector will receive an ack as if the message was successfully processed, even
though Conduit marks it internally as nacked. In other words, the source connector will receive an ack every time
Conduit handled a message end-to-end and it can be safely discarded from the source.

Pipeline nodes will either leave the message open and send it to the next node for processing or ack/nack it and not
send it further down the pipeline. If the ack/nack fails, the node will stop running and return an error that will
consequently stop the whole pipeline. The returned error is stored in the pipeline for further inspection by the user.

### Message state change handlers

A pipeline node can register state change handlers on a message that will be called when the message state changes. This
is used for example to register handlers that reroute nacked messages to a dead letter queue or to update metrics when a
message reaches the end of the pipeline.

## Semantics

### Messages are delivered in order

Since messages are passed between nodes in channels and a node only processes one message at a time, it is guaranteed

> that messages will flow through the Conduit pipeline in the same order that was produced by the source.

Reviewer 2: >  it is guaranteed that messages will flow 
Just so nobody gets the impression it's messages generally that will flow through a pipeline in the same order, it might be good to say "that messages from a single source connector will flow...". I do see there's a related caveat mention, but I think it's good to be clear here too.

# Pipeline semantics

This document describes the inner workings of a Conduit pipeline, its structure, and behavior. It also describes a
Conduit message and its lifecycle as it flows through the pipeline.

**NOTE**: Some parts of this document describe behavior that is not yet fully implemented (e.g. DLQs, order of acks).

> For more information see [#383](https://github.com/ConduitIO/conduit/pull/383#pullrequestreview-963196784). This note

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: I believe that it was intended to include the link to the PR only, not the PR review.

Author: Oko sokolovo 🦅

Reviewer 2: loooool :D
